# NFL-Hustle-Metric

Regardless of talent, skill, or experience, hustle is an important aspect in the evaluation of a player’s performance. In this project, I decided to explore one aspect of ‘hustle’: a player’s tendency to pursue the ball after being “out of the play”. To accomplish this, I first decided to filter the dataset to only plays where the ball was thrown (no sacks, spikes, etc.), and then split each into two sections: before and after pass arrival. In the time before pass arrival, I opted to limit the metric to just defensive players, as the importance of a non-targeted offensive player pursuing the ball during this time is significantly lower. For this section, I defined “out of the play” as a player being more than five yards from the targeted receiver at the release of the pass. This ensures that the primary defender(s) of the targeted receiver are not considered in the hustle metric, as they should already be close to the ball once the pass arrives. Next, I measured each player’s initial and final position over the course of the ball’s air travel. Using these points, along with the ball arrival location, I was able to calculate the distance each player traveled towards the ball arrival location during its airtime, considered “hustle yards” in my metric. Next, I calculated each player’s “opportunity yards”, or the maximum number of yards a player could travel towards the ball arrival location during the ball’s airtime. To account for differences in player speed, I found the maximum distance a player could travel by multiplying their fastest measured speed during the game by the ball’s airtime. Then, to determine “opportunity yards”, I took the minimum of the player’s max possible travel distance and their initial distance from the ball arrival location. Finally, I divided each player’s “hustle yards” by their “opportunity yards” to obtain their “hustle percent”. I planned on this being the final metric, but then realized the differences in each player’s play count made the metric less valuable in comparing players. So, to account for this, I multiplied “hustle percent” by the square root of each player’s play count, resulting in “hustle rating”, a metric that depicts how often and intensely a player pursues the ball when previously out of the play. For the time after pass arrival, I performed similar calculations, with a few classification differences: I only considered the time between either a catch or turnover and the end of a completed pass play, and I classified a player as “out of the play” if they were more than five yards from the initial catch or turnover. This measures a defensive player’s hustle in performing a tackle or blocking on a turnover return and an offensive player’s hustle in blocking or tackling during a turnover return.

While I expected to see a few more big names at the top of the list, the results of my metric were not overly surprising. Defensively, the top four performers were Darius Leonard, Doug Middleton, Jessie Bates, and Kiko Alonso (full results in code). Not surprisingly, the highest cornerback was 14th. With corners following their assignment rather than tracking the ball, it makes sense for them to have a lower hustle rating before ball arrival. Offensively, the top four performers were Jonnu Smith, Peyton Barber, Rishard Matthews, and Corey Davis. With three Titans in the top four, I dove into the Tennessee/Miami game a bit deeper. Upon further review, the Dolphins forced three interceptions totaling 81 return yards, giving Smith, Matthews, and Davis added hustle opportunity on the returns.

While this metric produced insightful results to be used in player evaluation, I see multiple avenues for improvement. First, I think the metric should expand to include more of the provided play data such as routes, formation, and direction. This could help to determine a player’s play-specific assignments more accurately, providing additional insight to their “hustle”. Second, the metric needs to adjust for player position, as groups are not evenly distributed in the results (e.g., linebackers and corners). Finally, I think the metric should consider the result of a player’s hustle, such as a forced fumble, freeing block, or touchdown-saving tackle. This could be accomplished by boosting a player’s hustle score for such a play. Overall, these three changes could significantly improve the metric.